---
title: 'Dundee Thegither: Grassroots Taking on the Pandemic'
date: 2020-05-12
image: /static/img/dundee_thegither.png
image_style: small
info_panel: inline
tags:
  - post
  - social innovation
  - dundee
  - interview
author:
  name: Nadeen Purna
---
Dundee Thegither, a volunteer-led COVID-19 response initiative, organised itself over a matter of weeks to emerge as one of the central teams in Dundee supporting the vulnerable in the pandemic. We spoke to Dr. Siobhan Tolland, Secretary, Dundee Thegither to learn more about its work, support, and struggles, and the impact of the pandemic on Dundee's communities.

Online Interview Date: 7th May 2020.

**How is Dundee Thegither currently organizing its work to respond to the COVID-19 crisis in Dundee?**

Dr. S.T: We have a two-tier structure. We have a phone line, which in its first instance is a _Blether_ line. It was initially set up to allow someone a space to talk when isolated because of the self-isolation. 

We also have a trained counsellor on as a volunteer if someone needs more structured support and counselling. Phone operators take referrals as well. The 2nd area is food provision. That is probably the core work that we do. We deliver emergency food parcels to people who cannot get out but also have no money, and that tends to be most of the people that we do. We never refuse food if that makes sense. If that is someone who has money but has nowhere of getting food, we'd rather parcels arrive next week and we would give them food as well. We also do a smaller side thing—prescription pick up but that's not many.

**We are seeing collaborations among local organisations at the heart of Dundee's response to the crisis. How are such collaborations coming about for Dundee Thegither?**

We were set up very quickly and are obivously very new. Effectively what might have happened I think is Lynne Short, one of the Dundee Councillors recognized that we were trying to build a system. We were introduced to organisations like Faith in the Community Dundee who is overseeing the food provision structure within the third sector. We kind of became part of that group. The DVVA allowed us to come under their group as well, in-terms of getting volunteers. We meet up on a weekly basis, share our experiences, share information in terms of what food might be available; if we are short of drivers we can contact other organisations if they can help etc. It is quite a nice and supportive community structure. Taught by Muhammad is one great example, particularly helpful for us. We received very good advice from them on how to run things from their long experience. We also had a discussion within the meeting about what would be our procedure given the circumstances, should we have a continuity of procedure or organisation should work on their own. It's about trying to find examples of good practices I suppose across all the sectors. There is also a massive learning curve— it is good to have that feedback, and support; in terms of funding as well that has proved helpful.

**What has been Dundee Thegither's experience when it comes to gathering resources?**

In the first instance we set up a crowdfunder. We offered it to DVVA who very kindly offered it back to us when they realized we are still going to run. In the early days we were thinking if the third sector is moving in, the Council is moving in then we might not be needed; but the DVVA and Eric felt money is better in our hands. That allowed us to run for the first couple of weeks. We very kindly got £800 from the Northwood Trust which really helped. We were able to plan a bit more; instead of doing a daily take we were able to plan on a week by week basis and align everything. We also very kindly received an anonymous donation of a £1000 GBP—which again relieved pressure. In the early days because it all happened so fast, we didn't even had a bank account. The Waterfront Community Trust stepped up to help with a valid bank account. Dundee Bairns gave us £500, which is great. And we have literally this week received about 7 grands after applying to lots of funding avenues. The Dundee City Centre and Harbour Community Council applied on our behalf; so we received money from the NHS Tayside Community Innovation Fund. And this morning we received another letter from Scottish and Southern Electricity Network (SSEN) - that gave us another £3000. That allowed us to remain afloat and to plan for months now because that's what we are going to need.

**Following that, how has such resource support impacted the initiative?**

It is evident that this is going to be a long-term structure now 'cause the need is going to be long term. It has given us a lot of stability. We have even been able to pay for travel expenses of volunteers. We got lot of people who were made unemployed, lost their benefit - people who are poor themselves. We could relax the rules a little bit; we are now putting in regular food drops for people for stability whereas it was quite ad hoc earlier. Another thing that came through another benefactor is the Willy Wonka event by the ground workers for kids. A golden ticket gets put in the food bags, they phone up and the team gets to speak to someone who is happy rather than someone who is desperate; they ask what's your favorite food, or your favorite toy, and then kids get wee gifts. That's proven quite successful. It actually increases the morale of the whole team; because, even like me, I am stuck indoors, but to even see this happen— it's the mental health element; giving people hope, cheering people up, it breaks up the monotony of the day as well. But as I was telling before the interview, we are now setting up our constitution, and if we feel the need to become a proper charity, we are getting the building blocks. As every week goes by, I think it becomes increasingly clearer that ** **even** if the social distancing is removed the social need resulting from COVID is not going to be removed**. We are in for a long-term economic shock basically. We are talking about the economy on its knees pretty much. We have been blessed in that respect. People have stepped in to help when we needed.

**Which group of people are particularly reaching out to you?**

We have a lot of parents; almost half of the people we support have kids, half of whom have kids aged 3 or under; many single parents which we would expect in Dundee. There are a lot of larger families as well. 2/3rd of the people that come through either have health conditions themselves or family or relatives that have a health condition. We are dealing with particularly vulnerable groups. That is part by chance I think; that might give us an indication of where the need might be. The other half tend to be older, singles or couples. There is a lot of vulnerable kids; the number of school age kids that we supported last week was nearly 50.

**Despite several such provisions made available, are there particular groups within Dundee's communities that are falling through the cracks?**

I will guarantee you that's the case! I honestly think we are probably touching the surface of the need. All I know is from my experiences; I have no statistics to back it up. What we get is a lot of people saying they never ever thought they would be in this position. We have a lot of older people, so it's good they ask for support. I know from Taught by Muhammad that the Muslim community has begun to ask as well, which is very unusual. I think there are lot of people who don't even recognize that you can get support; if you are used to the system and you know there is a crisis grant or benefit then you would probably have the understanding that you might get it. But a lot of people there have not experienced such structure and might not even know where to start looking. Dundee has got a long history of poverty. The 30s and 80s were bad; there was 10 years of austerity. There was very little to fall back on in terms of city finance and in terms of individual poverty level as well. In that respect, when this crisis has arrived, we have got benefits getting delayed, people been made unemployed, while there is deep-seated poverty. One of the reasons we set up is because we recognised the resilience of people in long-term poverty, to the disease will be much worse- because they are less healthy. I cannot think for one minute that we are managing to obliviate this issue in Dundee. I think it might be only on retrospect that we begin to understand the level in which it has affected people. I don't know how to reach these people, I don't even know if we could, or if we have the resources.

**What have been some of the major challenges and some of the biggest enablers of your work so far?**

The challenge might be something you might not necessarily have had anticipated. For us probably it is _psychological_ in the sense that we struggle to say 'no'. We were so engulfed, and nobody wanted to say no to a desperate person; this is when Taught by Muhammad came in and helped us a couple of weeks. Rizwan (Taught by Muhammad) was like "you cannae keep this up; this is how we do it". We made decisions that made things much clearer for us like limiting referrals time. I am working, trying to homeschool my son; everybody has a life. It allowed us space, time, to work and consider our own welfare. There have to be boundaries, processes set, and I think we reached that balance now. The other challenge is 'where do you stop?'. We had someone who didn't have any clothes; do we step in to help? Do we have the time, space? One of the early decisions we had to make is that we cannot do shopping services. We had to decide to focus on those who are desperate, have no money. They would end up in foodbanks but can't because of self-isolation.That was a challenge because **there are lots of people in need- on different degrees of need.**

In terms of enabling, the third sector has been great. Dundee City Council has been good. Dundee City Council is the only council in Scotland to give the third sector food provision support. They were given £10,000 per week for 10 weeks specifically for food provision to groups like us— that had a good impact since it means we don't need to spend near as much money in purchasing food. Fareshare has been phenomenally supportive; giving us free food. Between those two of those, I would say probably solving about half of our food needs which is amazing. Only 3 or 4 weeks ago we did not have anything. It allowed us the freedom and allowed us to feed more people. I might be political here, but the SNP helped; my local SNP Councillor stepped in. Lynne Short was one of our references because she recognized that need. The faith community helped. My local reverend, even though I am not a spiritual person—offered us the church hall space to store food when we had nothing in the early days. For me that's the most important thing, asking 'how can we help?'. That's the question maybe all organisations should be asking at this stage.

Find Dundee Thegither on: [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/Dundee-Thegither-331294644490156/) | [Twitter](https://twitter.com/DundeeThegither)