---
title: 'Social Innovation in Dundee Third Sector’s COVID-19 Response: Early Insights from Social Media'
layout: 'layouts/post_storymap.njk' 
storymap: https://uploads.knightlab.com/storymapjs/a5e6b32b459a6d369d308731609af747/third-sector-response-to-covid-19-dundee-cases/published.json
date: 2020-06-12
image: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1512758017271-d7b84c2113f1
info_panel: inline
tags:
  - post
  - storymap
author:
  name: Nadeen Purna
---
The Local third sector organisations addressing different social needs usually rely on their ability to access different pockets of the community otherwise excluded, and bring them together to harness the power of social capital. However, the social distancing rules due to the COVID-19 pandemic means this central feature of community togetherness and business-as-usual cannot continue. The marginalized, socially isolated, vulnerable in the community have been pushed further down into their silos.

This is when we see a bunch of third or voluntary sector organisations bricolaging and banding together to provide for the most essential needs of the community despite and overcoming such barriers. In such work there are traces of social innovation which conceptually emerges out of unmet needs and can result in transformed social and power relations. This piece explores some of the ways local third sector initiatives have been responding to the COVID-19 pandemic in Dundee and looks at their actions and approaches via a social innovation lens. This is done by looking at the public updates provided by the local charities, community projects, social enterprises in Dundee on their Facebook and Twitter accounts over the period 1st March 2020— 15th May 2020. The focus is on frontline organisations offering essentials: food, sanitary products and prescriptions, and those that are assisting them. 

## The ways the response efforts are coming about
The response efforts in the frontline to provide food and other essentials can be summarized in 4 strands. The Story Map “Third Sector Response to COVID-19: Dundee Cases” presents examples from 25 organisations and highlights how over the period the overall responses took shape. 

- **Redesigning**
  - Redesigning involves a complete turnaround of an organisation's services to respond to the pandemic 
- **Adapting** 
  - This involves organisations adapting themselves by retaining (some) existing programmes especially by shifting those online, but also included additional services tailored to the current crisis needs
- **Expanding**
  - Expanding involves community-oriented organisations having to increase their volume of operations due to their core service already being food and essentials provision to those in need. Changes include requiring more hands on deck, operational adjustments to factor in social distancing rules like only allowing volunteers in the facilities and handing out parcels from the door, ensuring constant supply. 
- **Innovation**
  - Innovation here would entail introduction of a new product or process that was otherwise not available in the zonal context prior to the crisis. While it maybe too early, there is evidence of such innovation already being rolled out. Over time, we might see more innovative outcomes from the TSOs especially within the digital frontier.

## What’s happening in-terms of Social Innovation?

### The promise of collaborations

At the heart of such agile response has been the ability to collaborate and work together. Local initiatives have been each other’s arms in pulling resources in such unprecedented times. It however appears that such collaborations are rather new. The small size of Dundee could have meant the organisations had some form of weak links with each other leveraging as Granovettar (1983) put it ‘the strength of weak ties’. The network itself might not necessarily be new. Collaborations appear to have started out of ad-hoc exchanges that over time have taken form of coordinated clusters. The exchanges include food stocks, financial resources, intangible resources and services like space, delivery, human resource, advice and information etc. The clusters are formed by the uniting of charities, social enterprises, and projects of varying size, stages, types (independent local or local wing of national charities), different faith-based and non-faith based ones. 

The collaborative clusters represent the notions of mutual aid by Kropotkin (Kropotkin, 1983, 2006 from Hall and Kirdina-Chandler, 2017) who stressed on its significance as opposed to competition for the progress and evolution of societies. While collaborative work is not new, not even in this space, under regular circumstances these organisations would often be competing for the same pot of money, particularly with state funding shrinking. Yet, those frictions have been seemingly circumvented to put community’s interest at the fore. In fact, organisations have given away from own fundraised money in staggering examples of mutual aid. Further in-terms of finance, even though nationally funding has been made available like the Wellbeing Fund or Third Sector Resilience Fund, it is difficult to know if the small charities have/had buffer money to survive the interim in which these funds become available to them. The projects which don’t have official charity or company status also run the risk of not being eligible for these. Support from local funders hence become imperative. They are acquainted with the projects and can mobilise small chunks of funds quicker, which has been the case in Dundee. Fellow organisations have also been helping on making applications on behalf of projects that cannot apply.

The agility of these clusters to adapt and mold their services to suit the needs of the crisis bears profound managerial implications. Despite being small and not always going by the business books raises questions like what factors enabled these organisations to act so promptly, since going forward those are the aspects TSOs would want to hone on. There appears strong mission commitment from staff and volunteers and organisational ethos shaped up by teamwork and/or leadership. Local knowledge and affiliation could also be at play here given most of the organisations in the cluster have strong local connect. Collaborations and support from peer organisations also seem to have enhanced their capacity to act somehow. The level or type of collaboration enacted, and if the benefits of so are contingent to a crisis period only or not also requires future attention. Could it also be that constant bricolaging amidst resource constraint over long periods of austerity has enabled these organisations to think on the feet? The organisation sizes are also pretty lean which could have given them an advantage to redesign or adapt quickly. There is little evidence of how the governance is panning out at the moment and what support has been made available from trustee boards. It is unlikely that any one reason has shaped up the proactive response from the clusters. Yet, it is likely that these teams at one hand galvanized their existing skills, resources, culture, and ethos while concurrently, the collaborations gave rise to new capacities. 

## Leveraging Narratives for Transparency and Legitimacy
A narrative probe of the current communication by Dundee’s TSOs reveals an innate humane approach. 

Constant assurances from the head of the organisations, staffs and volunteers, often in first person, helps make the communication appear more genuine and heartfelt. There are also regular updates on their activities, who all they are supporting and being supported by. Updates are being provided on the amount of some of the donations received or fund raised, the individuals and parties helping out, figures on distributions and deliveries, renewal of services, experiences etc. Frequent expressions of gratitude to and appreciation posts for the whole team and supporters are also commonplace. Most small charities are unlikely to have any dedicated social media personnel let alone a team; rather different members of the team would double up on this role. This helps add a personal touch and avoid giving out a corporate-esque strategized feel to the messages. Collectively, such approach of social media updates is helping enhance these organisations transparency. Social media could be their primary outlet to connect with the community; but it also takes messages out to fellow TSOs, funders, partners and potential collaborators. 

There does not appear to be a coordinated approach towards shaping a narrative, yet the approach taken is largely homogenous across the social media pages; albeit the pandemic lends a strong a plot. Language, communication, discourses or linguistic devices are important tools in the legitimation process (Meyer et al. 2013) as disclosures can further or lead to organisational legitimacy (Deegan, 2002).  Thus, going forward the disclosures, transparency coupled with a narrative based on human/community-first, partnership merits-acknowledging and locally-oriented approach can play a strong role in furthering or resulting in their legitimacy on pragmatic as well as normative/moral grounds. 

## Social Innovation
If looked at as an assemblage, social Innovation can be said to happen as heterogenous elements, actors and organisations are uniting to dovetail their strengths to enhance human solidarity, empower communities, shift social and power relations. So far from the Dundee TSO COVID-19 response, we see social relations changing- as communication largely has taken to the digital; we also see new connections formed between members of organisations, courtesy of possible weak ties. There is a stronger sense of solidarity as the organisations extend a helping hand to each other, even though they might be competitors in the funding space. Their communication on social media centred on a community-first, partnership-acknowledging, and gratitude-expressing narrative which also act as strong markers of solidarity. Shifts in power relations and empowerment can be far more difficult to gauge than the previous constituents. Yet, with possibility of attaining more legitimacy from transparency and narrative approach, the organisations stepping up might be able to reproduce the legitimacy of the sector as a whole and accumulate more negotiation power in the process. The collaborations have already seen inclusion of the public sector, private sectors, and funders— parties among which there can be high degree of power imbalance. Hence, a shift in power relations is not very far-fetched but how far the benefits trickle down to the wider third sector will need to be seen.

While the above discussed organisations present an optimistic view, there is a whole chunk of the sector that is out of sight. Dundee has over 600 charities (OSCR, 2020) and over 100 social enterprises (DSEN, 2020), and multiple community projects of which no official count could be traced. The selected bunch of the organisations forms a tiny fraction of this population. Several other organisations have been posting about transforming their work online or telephone. Nonetheless, a vast majority of the organisations don’t have a public facing digital channel- website or social media. If the organisations who have shown agility and proactiveness in reorganizing themselves are set to gain in the future, what happens to those who are not able to do so? Not having a digital presence does not mean the others are not being socially innovative; but could such absence penalize them going forward especially in the bid to gain legitimacy and on their ability to attract resources?

To summarise, social media has provided us with a window to the socially innovative processes and elements being put in place by the local third sector initiatives through their COVID-19 response in Dundee. Going forward, such socially innovative actions and its evidencing, or the lack thereof, can bear implications on organisational management, legitimacy, power relations, and resource attraction.  

## References
Deegan, C. (2002) ‘The legitimising effect of social and environmental disclosures–a theoretical foundation’, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, 15(3), pp.282-311.

Granovetter, M. (1983) ‘The strength of weak ties: A network theory revisited’, Sociological theory, 1, pp.201-233.

Hall, J. and Kirdina-Chandler, S. (2017) ‘Towards an intellectual history of evolutionary economics: competition and struggle versus cooperation and mutual aid’, Brazilian Journal of Political Economy, 37(3), pp.551-564.

Meyer, M., Buber, R. and Aghamanoukjan, A. (2013) ‘In search of legitimacy: Managerialism and legitimation in civil society organizations’, VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 24(1), pp.167-193.
